# How to Develop a Blog Example on Aptos

An example of developing a blog_example application based on the Aptos platform.

It only requires 30 or so lines of code (all of which is a description of the domain model) to be written by the developer, and then generates a blog example that emulates [RoR Getting Started](https://guides.rubyonrails.org/getting_started.html) in one click, without requiring the developer to write a single line of other code.


## Prerequisites

Currently, the dddappp low-code tool is published as a Docker image for developers to experience.

The off-chain services generated by the tool are written in Java and use the MySQL database by default.

So before getting started, you need to:

* Install [Aptos CLI](https://aptos.dev/tools/install-cli/).

* Install [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/).

* ~~Install MySQL database server.👈 Since the generation of off-chain services is currently under development, you can ignore this step for now.~~

* ~~Install JDK and Maven. The off-chain services generated by the tool currently use Java.👈 Since the generation of off-chain services is currently under development, you can ignore this step for now.~~

If you have already installed Docker, you can use Docker to run a MySQL database service. For example:

```shell
sudo docker run -p 3306:3306 --name mysql \
-v ~/docker/mysql/conf:/etc/mysql \
-v ~/docker/mysql/logs:/var/log/mysql \
-v ~/docker/mysql/data:/var/lib/mysql \
-e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=123456 \
-d mysql:5.7
```


## Programming

### Write DDDML Model File

In the `dddml` directory in the root of the repository, create a DDDML file like this:

```yaml
[TBD]
```

> **Tip**
>
> About DDDML, here is an introductory article: ["Introducing DDDML: The Key to Low-Code Development for Decentralized Applications"](https://github.com/wubuku/Dapp-LCDP-Demo/blob/main/IntroducingDDDML.md). 


### Run dddappp Project Creation Tool

In repository root directory, run:

```shell
docker run \
-v .:/myapp \
wubuku/dddappp-aptos:0.0.1 \
--dddmlDirectoryPath /myapp/dddml \
--boundedContextName Test.AptosBlogExample \
--aptosMoveProjectDirectoryPath /myapp/aptos-contracts \
--boundedContextAptosPackageName AptosBlogExample \
--boundedContextAptosNamedAddress aptos_blog_example \
--boundedContextJavaPackageName org.test.aptosblogexample \
--javaProjectsDirectoryPath /myapp/aptos-java-service \
--javaProjectNamePrefix aptosblogexample \
--pomGroupId test.aptosblogexample
```

The command parameters above are straightforward:

* Note that `/PATH/TO/test` should be replaced with the path of your local directory where you actually place the application code. This line indicates mounting your local directory into the `/myapp` directory inside the container.
* `dddmlDirectoryPath` is the directory where DDDML model files are located. It should be a readable directory path in the container.
* Interpret the value of parameter `boundedContextName` as the name of your application you want to develop. When there are multiple parts in your name, separate them with dots and use PascalCase naming style for each part. Bounded-context is a term in Domain-driven design (DDD) that refers to a specific problem domain scope that contains specific business boundaries, constraints, and language. If you don't understand this concept for now, it's not a big deal.
* `aptosMoveProjectDirectoryPath` is directory path where on-chain Aptos contract code is placed. It should be a readable and writable directory path in container.
* `boundedContextAptosPackageName` is package name of on-chain Aptos contracts. It's recommended to use PascalCase naming style.
* `boundedContextAptosNamedAddress` is default named address of on-chain Aptos contracts. It's recommended to use snake_case naming style.
* `boundedContextJavaPackageName` is Java package name of off-chain service. According to Java naming conventions, it should be all lowercase and parts should be separated by dots.
* `javaProjectsDirectoryPath` is directory path where off-chain service code is placed. Off-chain service consists of multiple modules (projects). It should be a readable and writable directory path in container.
* `javaProjectNamePrefix` is name prefix of each module of off-chain service. It's recommended to use an all-lowercase name.
* `pomGroupId` is GroupId of off-chain service. We use Maven as project management tool for off-chain service. It should be all lowercase and parts should be separated by dots.

After executing above command successfully, a directory `aptos-contracts` should be added to local directory `/PATH/TO/test`.


### Implementing Business Logic

If CRUD is all the business logic you need, You **don't** need to write a single line of code other than the DDDML model above. You **can skip this section** and just start testing your example application.

The tool has generated some files with the suffix `_logic.move` in the directory `aptos-contracts/sources`. 

Generally, these files contain the scaffolding code of functions that implement business logic, namely the signature part of the functions. You just need to fill in the implementation part of the functions. However, in this example, the `MOVE_CRUD_IT` preprocessor already generates the full CRUD methods for us.

---

It is possible that you feel that the default generated CRUD logic does not meet your needs.

For example, you might want to improve the model above by adding separate `Owner` fields for `Article` and `Comment`, as shown in this file: [blog.yaml](./dddml/blog.yaml). You want to use them to control who can update/delete articles and comments. Then, you may want to add comment without passing the `Owner` argument to `entry fun add_comment` and directly use the sender account address as the owner.

This requirement can currently be satisfied as follows.

First, define a custom method in the model file like this:

```yaml
aggregates:
  Article:
  # ...
    methods:
      AddComment:
        event:
          name: CommentAdded
          properties:
            Owner:
              type: address
        parameters:
          CommentSeqId:
            type: u64
          Commenter:
            type: String
            length: 100
          Body:
            type: String
            length: 500
```

Note that the `Owner` parameter is NOT present in the method parameters above.

Then, delete `article_add_comment_logic.move`, run the dddappp tool again. (Since the dddappp tool does not overwrite the `*_logic.move` files by default, you will need to delete it manually.)

Open the regenerated `article_add_comment_logic.move` file, find the `verify` function and fill in the body with the logic you want.


## Test Example

### Compile Apots Move contracts

#### Some preparatory work that may need to be done

It should be noted that below we assume that you will publish the Move contract to the Aptos devnet, so we skip the explanation of the modifications to some configuration files required for publishing to other networks.

Confirm that Aptos CLI is installed and enter the directory `aptos-contracts`:

```shell
aptos init
# Press Enter to confirm using the default values
aptos account fund-with-faucet --account default --amount 50000000000
```

View Aptos Profiles:

```shell
aptos config show-profiles
```

---

In the directory `aptos-contracts`, execute the compilation, which should now succeed:

```shell
aptos move compile --named-addresses aptos_blog_example=default
```

At this point, the coding phase of the application development is complete! Isn't it very simple?

---

Next, we will deploy and test the Demo application.

### Publish the Aptos contracts

Execute the following command in the directory `aptos-contracts` to publish the contracts to the chain:

```shell
[TBD]
```

If the command is executed successfully, the transaction digest of this publication will be output. For example:

```*shell
[TBD]
```

### Tip: Using this Cheatsheet

Here it is a cheatsheet on how to use the Aptos Client CLI to call on-chain contracts: [AptosMoveCLICheatsheet](./aptos-contracts/AptosMoveCLICheatsheet.md)

The parameters you need to fill in are placeholders containing their type and meaning (name). You can copy these commands, modify them as needed, and execute them directly in a terminal.

### CRUD Articles

Here we assume that the published package ID of the contracts is `0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60` (Replace it with your actual published package ID when you do your tests).

#### Create Articles

You can create an article like this (you need to replace the placeholder `{ACCOUNT_ADDRESS}` with your account address):

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function create \
--args \"Hello\" \"World\" {ACCOUNT_ADDRESS} \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

Then you can change the content of the first parameter (title) and the second parameter (body) after `--args`, and create a few more articles.

#### Read Articles

You can access the off-chain service RESTful API to get information about articles that have been created: http://localhost:1023/api/Articles

You can use parameters to filter articles, such as: http://localhost:1023/api/Articles?title=Hello

#### Update Articles

Let's assume that the object ID of an article you just created is `0xd31224eac22bfd66de709d521f337acf65a026e5fe16218ceae3a1843df5eaec`.

You can update an article like this: (Note that the first argument after --args is the object ID of the article, please replace it with the actual value.)

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function update \
--args 0xd31224eac22bfd66de709d521f337acf65a026e5fe16218ceae3a1843df5eaec \"Hello\" '"My friends."' {ACCOUNT_ADDRESS} \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

You can use the Aptos Client CLI to query information about an object like this:

```shell
aptos client object 0xd31224eac22bfd66de709d521f337acf65a026e5fe16218ceae3a1843df5eaec
```

#### Delete Articles

You can delete an article like this: (Note that the first argument after --args is the object ID of the article, please replace it with the actual value.)

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function delete \
--args 0xd31224eac22bfd66de709d521f337acf65a026e5fe16218ceae3a1843df5eaec \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

### CRUD Comments

#### Add Comments

First, get the object ID  of another article (the article that was not deleted).

You can add a comment like this: (Note that the first argument after --args is the object ID of an article, please replace it with the actual value.)

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function add_comment \
--args 0xf05e0623bb54630d2b78f2ae186babcd62585296a5ae2a002a2017a4eeaafd6b \"1\" \"Anonymous\" '"A test comment"' \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

Add more comment like this:

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function add_comment \
--args 0xf05e0623bb54630d2b78f2ae186babcd62585296a5ae2a002a2017a4eeaafd6b \"2\" \"Anonymous2\" '"A test comment2"' \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

#### Read Comments

You can access the off-chain service RESTful API to get information about comments of an article:

```shell
curl http://localhost:1023/api/Articles/0xf05e0623bb54630d2b78f2ae186babcd62585296a5ae2a002a2017a4eeaafd6b
```

#### Update Comments

We can submit a transaction like this to update a comment:

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function update_comment \
--args 0xf05e0623bb54630d2b78f2ae186babcd62585296a5ae2a002a2017a4eeaafd6b \"1\" \"Anonymous\" '"A test comment from Anonymous"' {ACCOUNT_ADDRESS} \
--gas-budget 10000000
```

Then we can query the comment state again to see if the comment content has been updated.

#### Remove Comments

We can submit a transaction like this to delete a comment:

```shell
aptos client call --package 0xdc93d426b0a5ceaa8a883776c34370f83af72df528e8c9229a4febe2dc1b3b60 --module article_aggregate --function remove_comment \
--args 0xf05e0623bb54630d2b78f2ae186babcd62585296a5ae2a002a2017a4eeaafd6b \"1\" \
--gas-budget 10000000
```


## Some Tips

### Clean Up Exited Docker Containers

Run the command:

```shell
docker rm $(docker ps -aq --filter "ancestor=wubuku/dddappp:0.0.1")
```

### A More Complex Aptos Demo

If you are interested, you can find a more complex Aptos Demo here: ["A Aptos Demo"](https://github.com/dddappp/A-Aptos-Demo).

### Blog Example for Rooch

Here is a Rooch version like this blog example: https://github.com/rooch-network/rooch/blob/main/examples/blog_example/README.md

